adding percolate query dsl docs (#9798)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _query-dsl/specialized/percolate.md

## Create an index to store saved queries

First, create an index with `mappings` configured with [`percolator` field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/percolator/) to store the saved queries:

```json
PUT /my_percolator_index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "query": {
        "type": "percolator"
      },
      "title": {
        "type": "text"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Add a query matching "apple" in `title` field:

```json
POST /my_percolator_index/_doc/1
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "title": "apple"
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Add a query matching "banana" in `title` field:

```json
POST /my_percolator_index/_doc/2
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "title": "banana"
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Percolate an inline document

You can test an inline document against saved queries:

```json
POST /my_percolator_index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "percolate": {
      "field": "query",
      "document": {
        "title": "Fresh Apple Harvest"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> This will match the saved query looking for "apple":

Reviewer: I think we should provide multi query match for the percolated documents as well to demonstrate the slot numbering

```json
{
  ...
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 1,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.13076457,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "1",
        "_score": 0.13076457,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "apple"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            0
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Percolate an existing indexed document

Create a separate index for your documents:

```json
PUT /products
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "title": {
        "type": "text"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Add a document:

```json
POST /products/_doc/1
{
  "title": "Banana Smoothie Special"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Check if the stored queries match the indexed document:

```json
POST /my_percolator_index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "percolate": {
      "field": "query",
      "index": "products",

>       "id": "1"

Reviewer: Are both of these parameters always  used together ?

Author: I've added a note that both are required

      "field": "query",
      "documents": [
        { "title": "Apple event coming soon" },
        { "title": "Banana farms expand" },
        { "title": "Cherry season starts" }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Each match indicates which document slot matched using `_percolator_document_slot`:

```json
{
  ...
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 2,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.46484798,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "2",
        "_score": 0.46484798,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "banana"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            1
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "1",
        "_score": 0.41211313,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "apple"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            0
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Multi-query percolation using named query

> You can percolate different documents inside a named query:

Reviewer: We should also mention the comparative performance of this ways vs multiple documents in single percolate query

Reviewer: Ah I see!, thanks

---
layout: default
title: Percolate
parent: Specialized queries
nav_order: 55
---

# Percolate

> Use the `percolate` query to find stored queries that match a given document. This is the opposite of a regular search. Instead of finding documents that match a query, you find queries that match a document. Percolate queries are often used for alerting, notifications, and reverse search use cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `percolate` query to find stored queries that match a given document. This operation is the opposite of a regular search: instead of finding documents that match a query, you find queries that match a document. Percolate queries are often used for alerting, notifications, and reverse search use cases.
```

> - You can percolate a document provided inline or fetch an existing document from an index.

Reviewer 2: Please provide an intro sentence for this list.

- The document and the stored queries must use the same field names and types.
- You can combine percolation with filtering and scoring to build complex matching systems.

> - Percolate queries are considered expensive and will only run if the cluster setting `search.allow_expensive_queries` is set to `true` (default). If this setting is `false`, percolate queries will be rejected.

Reviewer 2: Link to expensive queries section on the main query DSL page

Percolate queries are useful in a variety of real-time matching scenarios. Some common use cases include:

> - **E-commerce notifications**: Customers can register interest in products, for example: “Notify me when new Apple laptops are in stock”. When new product documents are indexed, the system finds all users with matching saved queries and sends alerts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **E-commerce notifications**: Users can register interest in products, for example: “Notify me when new Apple laptops are in stock”. When new product documents are indexed, the system finds all users with matching saved queries and sends alerts.
```

- **Job alerts**: Job seekers save queries based on preferred job titles or locations, and new job postings are matched against these to trigger alerts.
- **Security and alerting systems**: Percolate incoming log or event data against saved rules or anomaly patterns.
- **News filtering**: Match incoming articles against saved topic profiles to categorize or deliver relevant content.

## How percolation works

1. Saved queries are stored in a special [`percolator` field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/percolator/).
2. Documents are compared against all saved queries.

> 3. Matching queries are returned with their `_id`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Each matching query is returned with its `_id`.
```

4. If highlighting is enabled, matched text snippets are also returned.

> 5. If multiple documents are sent, `_percolator_document_slot` displays which document matched.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. If multiple documents are sent, `_percolator_document_slot` displays the matching document.
```

Reviewer 2: This is singular "document", correct?

> 

Reviewer 2: Let's add a heading level 2 "Example", an intro sentence for the example, and make the steps heading level 3.

## Create an index to store saved queries

> First, create an index with `mappings` configured with [`percolator` field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/percolator/) to store the saved queries:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, create an index and configure its `mappings` with a [`percolator` field type]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/percolator/) to store the saved queries:
```

```json
PUT /my_percolator_index
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "query": {
        "type": "percolator"
      },
      "title": {
        "type": "text"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Add a query matching "apple" in `title` field:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add a query matching "apple" in the `title` field:
```

```json
POST /my_percolator_index/_doc/1
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "title": "apple"
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Add a query matching "banana" in `title` field:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add a query matching "banana" in the `title` field:
```

```json
POST /my_percolator_index/_doc/2
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "title": "banana"
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Percolate an inline document

> You can test an inline document against saved queries:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Test an inline document against the saved queries:
```

```json
POST /my_percolator_index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "percolate": {
      "field": "query",
      "document": {
        "title": "Fresh Apple Harvest"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

This will match the saved query looking for "apple":

> 

Reviewer 2: Add a descriptive sentence to the response

```json
{
  ...
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 1,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.13076457,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "1",
        "_score": 0.13076457,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "apple"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            0
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Percolate with multiple documents

> You can test multiple documents in the same query:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test multiple documents in the same query, use the following request:
```

```json
POST /my_percolator_index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "percolate": {
      "field": "query",
      "documents": [
        { "title": "Banana flavoured ice-cream" },
        { "title": "Apple pie recipe" },
        { "title": "Banana bread instructions" },
        { "title": "Cherry tart" }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The `_percolator_document_slot` field helps you identify which document (by index) matched which saved query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `_percolator_document_slot` field helps you identify each document (by index) matching each saved query:
```

```json
{
  ...
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 2,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.54726034,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "1",
        "_score": 0.54726034,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "apple"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            1
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "2",
        "_score": 0.31506687,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "banana"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            0,
            2
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Percolate an existing indexed document

> 

Reviewer 2: Could you enter an intro sentence for this example?

{
  "query": {
    "percolate": {
      "field": "query",
      "index": "products",
      "id": "1"
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

You must provide both `index` and `id` when using an already stored document.
{: .note}

The corresponding query is returned:

```json
{
  ...
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 1,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.13076457,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "2",
        "_score": 0.13076457,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "banana"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            0
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Batch percolation (multiple documents)

You can check multiple documents in one request:

```json
POST /my_percolator_index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "percolate": {
      "field": "query",
      "documents": [
        { "title": "Apple event coming soon" },
        { "title": "Banana farms expand" },
        { "title": "Cherry season starts" }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Each match indicates which document slot matched using `_percolator_document_slot`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each match indicates the matching document in the `_percolator_document_slot` field:
```

```json
{
  ...
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 2,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.46484798,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "2",
        "_score": 0.46484798,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "banana"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            1
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "1",
        "_score": 0.41211313,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "apple"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            0
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> ## Multi-query percolation using named query

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Multi-query percolation using a named query
```

You can percolate different documents inside a named query:

```json
GET /my_percolator_index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "bool": {
      "should": [
        {
          "percolate": {
            "field": "query",
            "document": {
              "title": "Apple pie recipe"
            },
            "name": "apple_doc"
          }
        },
        {
          "percolate": {
            "field": "query",
            "document": {
              "title": "Banana bread instructions"
            },
            "name": "banana_doc"
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The `name` parameter is appended to `_percolator_document_slot` to distinguish which query was matched:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `name` parameter is appended to `_percolator_document_slot` to provide the matching query:
```

```json
{
  ...
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 2,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.13076457,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "1",
        "_score": 0.13076457,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "apple"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot_apple_doc": [
            0
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "2",
        "_score": 0.13076457,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "banana"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot_banana_doc": [
            0
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> This approach enables you to configure more custom query logic for individual documents. In the following example you can see how a field `title` is queried in the first document and `description` in the second, with added `boost` parameter:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach enables you to configure more custom query logic for individual documents. In the following example, the `title` field is queried in the first document and the `description` field is queried in the second document. The `boost` parameter is also provided:
```

```json
GET /my_percolator_index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "bool": {
      "should": [
        {
          "constant_score": {
            "filter": {
              "percolate": {
                "field": "query",
                "document": {
                  "title": "Apple pie recipe"
                },
                "name": "apple_doc"
              }
            },
            "boost": 1.0
          }
        },
        {
          "constant_score": {
            "filter": {
              "percolate": {
                "field": "query",
                "document": {
                  "description": "Banana bread with honey"
                },
                "name": "banana_doc"
              }
            },
            "boost": 3.0
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> ## Batch compared to named percolation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Batch percolation compared to named percolation
```

> Both `documents` and `bool` with `name` approaches can be used to percolate multiple documents, but they differ in how results are labeled, interpreted, and controlled. They provide functionally similar results but with important structural differences. See following comparison:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both batch percolation (using `documents`) and named percolation (using `bool` with `name`) can be used to percolate multiple documents, but they differ in how results are labeled, interpreted, and controlled. They provide functionally similar results but with important structural differences, described in the following table.
```

> | Feature                        | `documents` (Batch)                            | Named (`bool` + `percolate` + `name`)            |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Feature                        | Batch (`documents`)                            | Named (`bool` + `percolate` + `name`)            |
```

|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Input format                  | One percolate clause, array of documents       | Multiple percolate clauses, one per document     |
| Traceability per document     | By slot index (0, 1, ...)                      | By name (`apple_doc`, `banana_doc`)        |
| Response field for match slot | `_percolator_document_slot: [0]`              | `_percolator_document_slot_<name>: [0]`          |
| Highlight prefix              | `0_title`, `1_title`                           | `apple_doc_title`, `banana_doc_title`            |

> | Custom control per doc        | Not possible                                | Can customize each clause                     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Custom control per doc        | Not supported                                | Can customize each clause                     |
```

| Supports boosts and filters     | No                                           | Yes (per clause)                              |

> | Performance                   | Best for large batches                      | Slightly slower with many clauses              |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Performance                   | Best for large batches                      | Slightly slower when there are many clauses              |
```

| Use case                      | Bulk matching jobs, large event streams        | Per-document tracing, testing, custom control    |

## Highlighting matches

Percolate queries handle highlighting differently from regular queries:

- In a regular query, the document is stored in the index, and the search query is used to highlight the matching terms.

> - In a percolate query, the roles are reversed, the saved queries (in the percolator index) are used to highlight the document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In a percolate query, the roles are reversed: the saved queries (in the percolator index) are used to highlight the document.
```

> This means the document provided via `document` or `documents` is the target for highlighting and the percolator queries determine which section is highlighted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means the document provided in `document` or `documents` is the target for highlighting and the percolator queries determine the sections that are highlighted.
```

### Single document highlighting

> Using previously defined searches in `my_percolator_index`, use the following command to highlight matches in the `title` field:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example uses the previously defined searches in `my_percolator_index`. Use the following request to highlight matches in the `title` field:
```

      "title": {}
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The matches are highlighted depending on the query that was matched:

```json
{
  ...
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 2,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.13076457,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "1",
        "_score": 0.13076457,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "apple"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            0
          ]
        },
        "highlight": {
          "title": [
            "<em>Apple</em> banana smoothie"
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "2",
        "_score": 0.13076457,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "banana"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            0
          ]
        },
        "highlight": {
          "title": [
            "Apple <em>banana</em> smoothie"
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> ### Multiple documents highlighting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Multiple document highlighting
```

When percolating multiple documents using the `documents` array, a slot index is assigned to each document. The highlight keys then take the following form, where `<slot>` is the index of the document in your `documents` array:

```json
"<slot>_<fieldname>": [ ... ]
```

Use the following command to percolate two documents with highlighting:

```json
POST /my_percolator_index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "percolate": {
      "field": "query",
      "documents": [
        { "title": "Apple pie recipe" },
        { "title": "Banana smoothie ideas" }
      ]
    }
  },
  "highlight": {
    "fields": {
      "title": {}
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The response will contain highlighting fields prefixed with document slots, such as `0_title` and `1_title`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The response contains highlighting fields prefixed with document slots, such as `0_title` and `1_title`:
```

```json
{
  ...
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 2,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.31506687,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "1",
        "_score": 0.31506687,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "apple"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            0
          ]
        },
        "highlight": {
          "0_title": [
            "<em>Apple</em> pie recipe"
          ]
        }
      },
      {
        "_index": "my_percolator_index",
        "_id": "2",
        "_score": 0.31506687,
        "_source": {
          "query": {
            "match": {
              "title": "banana"
            }
          }
        },
        "fields": {
          "_percolator_document_slot": [
            1
          ]
        },
        "highlight": {
          "1_title": [
            "<em>Banana</em> smoothie ideas"
          ]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Parameters

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The `percolate` query supports the following parameters.

```

| Parameter | Required/Optional | Description |
|-----------|-------------------|-------------|

> | `field` | Required | Field containing the stored percolator queries. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `field` | Required | The field containing the stored percolator queries. |
```

> | `document` | Optional | Single inline document to match against saved queries. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `document` | Optional | A single inline document to match against saved queries. |
```

> | `documents` | Optional | Array of multiple inline documents to match. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `documents` | Optional | An array of multiple inline documents to match against saved queries. |
```

> | `index` | Optional | Index containing the document you want to match. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `index` | Optional | An index containing the document you want to match. |
```

> | `id` | Optional | ID of the document to fetch from the index. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `id` | Optional | The ID of the document to fetch from the index. |
```

> | `routing` | Optional | Routing value to use when fetching the document. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `routing` | Optional | The routing value to use when fetching the document. |
```

> | `preference` | Optional | Preference for the shard routing when fetching the document. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `preference` | Optional | The preference for the shard routing when fetching the document. |
```

> | `name` | Optional | Name assigned to a percolate clause, helpful when using multiple percolates in a `bool` query. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `name` | Optional | The name assigned to a `percolate` clause. Helpful when using multiple `percolate` clauses in a `bool` query. |
```
